PEP 692: Using TypedDict for more precise `**kwargs` typing (#2620)
python/peps: pep-0692.rst

PEP: 692
Title: Using TypedDict for more precise \*\*kwargs typing
Author: Franek Magiera <framagie@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 29-May-2022
Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History: 29-May-2022

Abstract
========

Current specification enables for type hinting ``**kwargs`` as long as all of the keyword arguments specified by them are of the same type. However, that behaviour can be very limiting. Therefore, in this PEP we propose a new way to enable more precise ``**kwargs`` typing. The new approach revolves around using ``TypedDict`` to type ``**kwargs`` that comprise keyword arguments of different types.

Motivation
==========

> Currently annotating ``**kwargs`` with a type ``T`` means that the ``kwargs`` type is in fact ``Dict[str, T]``. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently annotating ``**kwargs`` with a type ``T`` means that the ``kwargs`` type is in fact ``dict[str, T]``. For example:
```

::

    def foo(**kwargs: str) -> None: ...

> means that all keyword arguments in ``foo`` are strings (i.e. ``kwargs`` is of type ``Dict[str, str]``). This behaviour limits the ability to type annotate ``**kwargs`` only to the cases where all of them are of the same type. However, it is often the case that keyword arguments conveyed by ``**kwargs`` have different types that are dependent on the keyword's name. In those cases type annotating ``**kwargs`` is not possible. This is especially a problem for already existing codebases where the need of refactoring the code in order to introduce proper type annotations may be considered not worth the effort. This in turn prevents the project from getting all of the benefits that type hinting can provide. As a consequence, there has been a lot of discussion around supporting more precise ``**kwargs`` typing [#mypyIssue4441]_ and it became a feature that is necessary for a large part of Python community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
means that all keyword arguments in ``foo`` are strings (i.e., ``kwargs`` is of type ``dict[str, str]``). This behaviour limits the ability to type annotate ``**kwargs`` only to the cases where all of them are of the same type. However, it is often the case that keyword arguments conveyed by ``**kwargs`` have different types that are dependent on the keyword's name. In those cases type annotating ``**kwargs`` is not possible. This is especially a problem for already existing codebases where the need of refactoring the code in order to introduce proper type annotations may be considered not worth the effort. This in turn prevents the project from getting all of the benefits that type hinting can provide. As a consequence, there has been a lot of discussion around supporting more precise ``**kwargs`` typing [#mypyIssue4441]_ and it became a feature that is necessary for a large part of Python community.
```

Rationale
=========

PEP 589 introduced the ``TypedDict`` type constructor that supports dictionary types consisting of string keys and values of potentially different types. This makes ``TypedDict`` a perfect candidate to be used for more precise ``**kwargs`` typing. However, specifing ``**kwargs`` type using a ``TypedDict`` means, as mentioned earlier, that each keyword argument specified by ``**kwargs`` is a ``TypedDict`` itself. For instance:

::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        year: int
    
    def foo(**kwargs: Movie) -> None: ...

> means that each keyword argument in ``foo`` is itself a ``Movie`` dictionary that has a ``name`` key with a string type value and a ``year`` key with an integer type value. Therefore, in order to support specifing ``kwargs`` type as a ``TypedDict`` without breaking current behaviour, a new syntax has to be introduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
means that each keyword argument in ``foo`` is itself a ``Movie`` dictionary that has a ``name`` key with a string type value and a ``year`` key with an integer type value. Therefore, in order to support specifing ``kwargs`` type as a ``TypedDict`` without breaking current behaviour, a new syntax has to be introduced.
```
```suggestion
means that each keyword argument in ``foo`` is itself a ``Movie`` dictionary that has a ``name`` key with a string type value and a ``year`` key with an integer type value. Therefore, in order to support specifying ``kwargs`` type as a ``TypedDict`` without breaking current behaviour, a new syntax has to be introduced.
```

Specification
=============

> To support the aforementioned use case we propose to use the double asterisk syntax inside of the type annotation. The required grammar change is discussed in more detail in section `Grammar Changes`_. Continuing the previous example:

Reviewer 2: I didn't realize that you were thinking of proposing a grammar change. The SC has indicated that the bar is _very_ high when it comes to grammar changes for features that are specific to typing. I therefore think it's likely that this proposal will be rejected if it proposes a grammar change. I thought the proposal was to support `Unpack[T]`, which doesn't require any new syntax.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be good to engage with the Steering Council on this prior to submitting the PEP, since they did, after all, accept PEP 646 (also required syntax changes, also very typing-specific). The changes in syntax here feel like a fairly natural extension of the changes made by PEP 646, and don't feel nearly as jarring as those proposed by PEP 677 (a PEP I initially supported, but had mixed feelings about by the end).

Reviewer: Yes, I'm hopeful this will be acceptable because PEP 646's similar change seemed uncontroversial. It's true though that the SC at the PyCon panel recommended to split out syntax changes from typing ecosystem changes, so we could consider having one PEP for the new type system feature (initially spelled with `Unpack`) and another for the grammar change. Let me think about this some more and ask for other opinions.

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...

> would mean that the ``**kwargs`` comprise two keyword arguments specified by ``Movie`` (i.e. a ``name`` keyword of type ``str`` and a ``year`` keyword of type ``int``). Then, inside the function itself, appropriate type checking would take place:

Reviewer 4: "appropriate type checking would take place" at type checking time, not at runtime.

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie) -> None:

>         kwargs["name"].capitalize()      # OK!

Reviewer: Could use `assert_type(kwargs, Movie)` to communicate the point more succinctly.

        kwargs["year"] + 42              # OK!
        kwargs["name"] + kwargs["year"]  # WRONG! Unsupported operand types for + ("str" and "int")

The ``kwargs`` parameter inside the function should be treated exactly the same way as any other ``TypedDict``.

Function calls with standard dictionaries
-----------------------------------------

> Calling a function that has ``**kwargs`` typed using the ``**kwargs: **Movie`` sytnax with a standard dictionary must raise an error. For example:

Reviewer 4: Must raise an error at runtime (the python level) or when type checking? (The former doesn't make sense, but it is unspecified currently)

Reviewer 2: Yes, I presume you mean "a type checker should generate an error". The term `raise` implies a runtime error.

> Calling a function that has ``**kwargs`` typed using the ``**kwargs: **Movie`` sytnax with a standard dictionary must raise an error. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calling a function that has ``**kwargs`` typed using the ``**kwargs: **Movie`` syntax with a standard dictionary must raise an error. For example:
```

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...

>     movie: dict[str, str] = {"name": "Life of Brian", "year": 1979}

Reviewer: This line should also raise an error, because 1979 is not a str.
```suggestion
    movie: dict[str, object] = {"name": "Life of Brian", "year": 1979}
```

    foo(**movie)  # WRONG! Movie is of type dict[str, str]

    typedMovie: Movie = {"name": "The Meaning of Life", "year": 1983}
    foo(**typedMovie)  # OK!

> However, if the dictionary is completely untyped it is up to the type checker whether to raise an error or not:

Reviewer: I think we can simply omit this example and paragraph.

Reviewer 2: I agree that this should be omitted. This gets into inference behaviors, which are not specified in any other PEPs.

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...

    movie = {"name": "Life of Brian", "year": 1979} 

    foo(**movie)  # Error/Success dependant on the type checker.

Keyword collisions
------------------

> A ``TypedDict`` that is used to type ``**kwargs`` could potentially contain keys that are already defined in the function's signature. If the duplicate name is a standard argument, an error should be raised. If the duplicate name is a positional only argument, no errors should be raised. For example:

Reviewer 4: "an error should be raised" / "no errors should be raised" -- again, unspecified

Reviewer: All of this should be type checking-only. Maybe just put a note at the beginning of the spec saying that the new annotation has no runtime effect.

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, I'd avoid using the term "raise" when talking about errors emitted by a type checker. Use "generated" or "emitted" or "reported" instead. The term "raise" implies a runtime exception.

::

    def foo(name, **kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...     # WRONG! "name" will always bind to the first parameter.

    def foo(name, /, **kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...  # OK! "name" is a positional argument, so **kwargs can contain a "name" keyword

Required and non-required keys
------------------------------

> By default all keys in a ``TypedDict`` are required. This behaviour can be overriden by setting the dictionary's ``total`` parameter as ``False``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default all keys in a ``TypedDict`` are required. This behaviour can be overridden by setting the dictionary's ``total`` parameter as ``False``:
```

::

    class Movie(TypedDict, total=False):
        title: str
        year: int 

    dictionary: Movie = {"title": "Life of Brian"}         # OK! "year" is not required.
    dictionary = {"title": "Life of Brian", "year": 1979}  # OK!

> Moreover, PEP 655 introduced new type qualifiers - ``typing.Required`` and ``typing.NotRequired`` - that enable specyfing whether a particular key is required or not:

Reviewer 4: I would combine these two paragraphs and remove the example -- in the Specification section, a level of familiarity with the type hinting system can be assumed.

::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        title: str
        year: NotRequired[int]

> When using a ``TypedDict`` to type ``**kwargs`` all of the required and non-required keys should correspond to required and non-required function keyword parameters. Therefore, if a required key is not supported by the caller, then an error must be raised.

Reviewer 4: "an error must be raised" -- by whom?

Reviewer 2: Same as above — avoid the term "raise".

Assignment
----------

> A function typed using the ``**kwargs: **Movie`` construct can be assigned to another callable type only if they are compatible. This can happen in the following cases:

Reviewer 4: "assigned to another callable type" -- I think this could be clearer. You're talking about valid assignments under static type checking, not runtime assignments. Perhaps "validly assigned" or "pass type checking" or similar.

> 1. Both destination and source have a ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` parameter, the destination ``TypedDict`` is assignable to the source ``TypedDict`` and the rest of the parameters are the compatible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Both destination and source have a ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` parameter, the destination ``TypedDict`` is assignable to the source ``TypedDict`` and the rest of the parameters are compatible.
```

Reviewer: Also, I think this gets the variance wrong. Consider two callables `f1: (int) -> bool` and `f2: (object) -> bool`. `f1` is *not* assignable to `f2`, because when you have an `f2`, you can pass it any object, but `f1` must have an int. On the other hand, `f2` is assignable to `f1`. Functions parameters behave contravariantly.

For analogous reasons, for two functions `(**TD1) -> ...` and `(**TD2) -> ...`, the first function is assignable to the second if `TD2` is assignable to `TD1`, not the other way around.

(2) also gets the variance wrong.

Last, you ignore the return type, but it also affects assignability. However, it is covariant.

Author: I think the way I worded it was confusing.

> For analogous reasons, for two functions `(**TD1) -> ...` and `(**TD2) -> ...`, the first function is assignable to the second if `TD2` is assignable to `TD1`, not the other way around.

The first function is assignable to the second, so the first function is the "source" and the second one is the "destination". So the destination `TypedDict` (`TD2`) has to be assignable to the source TypedDict (`TD1`) - I think this is the source (pun not intended) of the error - what I meant is:

`Both destination and source have a ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` parameter, the destination function's ``TypedDict`` is assignable to the source function's ``TypedDict`` and the rest of the parameters are compatible.`

Let me try to find a better way to phrase it.

> 2. If the destination callable contains traditionally typed ``**kwargs: T`` and the source callable is typed using ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` then each ``TypedDict`` value has to be assignable to type ``T``. Again, the rest of the parameters has to be compatible.

Reviewer 2: This section also gets the variance backward.

> 3. If the destination callable doesn't contain ``**kwargs`` and the source callable contains ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` then all of the ``TypedDict`` fields should be assignable to individual named parameters. Again, the rest of the parameters has to be compatible. For example:

Reviewer 2: Minor nit: "has to be" should be "have to be".

::

    class MovieBase(TypedDict, total=True):
        title: str
    
    class Movie(MovieBase, total=False):
        year: int
    
    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...
    def bar(title: str, year: int = ...): ...

    bar = foo  # OK!

> 4. If the destination callable contains ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` and the source callable containes either untyped or traditionally typed ``**kwargs: T`` then an error should be raised.

Reviewer 2: Avoid the term "raised" here.

5. If the destination callable contains ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` then source callable should have keyword parameters assignable to the key value pairs in the ``TypedDict``. Again, the rest of the parameters should be compatible.

> ``TypedDict`` unions

Reviewer: This should go in "Rejected Ideas"

--------------------

It is possible to create unions of typed dictionaries. However, supporting typing ``**kwargs`` with a union of typed dicts would greatly increase the complexity of the implementation of this PEP and there seems to be no compelling use case to justify the support for this. Therefore, using unions of typed dictionaries to type ``**kwargs`` as described in the context of this PEP should result in an error:

::

    class Book(TypedDict):
        genre: str
        pages: int
    
    TypedDictUnion = Movie | Book

    def foo(**kwargs: **TypedDictUnion) -> None: ...  # WRONG! Cannot use a union of TypedDicts to type **kwargs

Additional keys
---------------

> A big advantage of using ``**kwargs`` is the ability to pass arbitrary dictionaries containing keyword-value pairs to the function and let the function pick and use only the ones it needs. However, currently, there is no way to define a ``TypedDict`` that would allow additional keys, so supporting this feature would require an addition to the ``TypedDict`` specification. If this limitation blocks the acceptance of this PEP, then the PEP's scope would have to be extended or a new PEP proposing additional keys for ``TypedDict`` would have to be proposed.

Reviewer 4: This section seems speculative, I would remove personally, or add as a limitation / rejected idea. It shouldn't be in Specification.

Reviewer: Agree

        | param_double_star_annotation & ')'

    param_double_star_annotation: NAME double_star_annotation

    double_star_annotation: ':' double_star_expression

    double_star_expression: '**' expression

A new AST node needs to be created so that type checkers can differentiate the semantics of the new syntax and take into account that the ``**kwargs`` should be unpacked. The proposition is to add a new ``DoubleStarred`` AST node. Then, an AST node for the function defined as:

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...

should look as below:

::

    FunctionDef(
      name='foo',
      args=arguments(
        posonlyargs=[],
        args=[],
        kwonlyargs=[],
        kw_defaults=[],
        kwarg=arg(
          arg='kwargs',
          annotation=DoubleStarred(
            value=Name(id='Movie', ctx=Load()),
            ctx=Load())),
        defaults=[]),
      body=[
        Expr(
          value=Constant(value=Ellipsis))],
      decorator_list=[])],
    type_ignores=[])

The runtime annotations should be consistent with the AST. Continuing the previous example:

::

    >>> def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...
    ...
    >>> foo.__annotations__

>     {'kwargs': **Movie}

Reviewer 5: I might suggest having the example output be instead:
```
{'kwargs': Unpack[Movie]}
```
which avoids introducing the new expression form `**expr`.

> In order to make the runtime behaviour consistent with the AST as shown above we propose to:

Reviewer: We shouldn't specify what goes in typing.py: that's an implementation detail. But we *should* specify what the `**` operator does, which is call the `__unpack__` special method. We should make it explicit that `def f(**kwargs: **T):` is equivalent to `def f(**kwargs: T.__unpack__()):`.

1. Add a new ``_UnpackedTypedDict`` class to the ``typing`` module and include it in ``_TypedDictMeta`` as a ``_unpacked`` property.
2. Add a special ``__unpack__`` method to the ``_TpedDictMeta`` class that would return an instance of the ``_UnpackedTypedDict``.

Then, specyfing ``def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...`` would call an ``__unpack__`` special method on ``Movie``.

To be more precise the changes in the ``typing`` module would look as follows:

::

    class _UnpackedTypedDict:
        def __init__(self, name):
            self._name = name

        def __repr__(self):
            return '**' + self._name 
    
    class _TypedDictMeta(type):
        def __init__(self, name):
            self._name = name
            self._unpacked = _UnpackedTypedDict(name)

        def __unpack__(self):
            return self._unpacked

> Implications

Reviewer: Not sure we even need this section.

------------

With this change some of the allowed annotations would make no sense, for example:

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **int): ...

Those kind of issues should be addressed by static type checkers. Specifically, the new double asterisk syntax should be only used with instances of ``TypedDict``. At runtime the objects that do not have an ``__unpack__`` method should behave as below:

::

    >>> def foo(**kwargs: **int): ...
    ...
    AttributeError: type object 'int' has no attribute '__unpack__'

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

Using the double asterisk operator for annotating ``**kwargs`` is a syntax that would be only available in new versions of Python. PEP 646 dealt with the similar problem and its authors introduced a new type operator ``Unpack``. For the purposes of this PEP, the proposition is to reuse ``Unpack`` for more precise ``**kwargs`` typing. For example:

::

    def foo(**kwargs: Unpack[Movie]) -> None: ...

> There are several reasons for reusing PEP 646's ``Unpack``. Firstly, the name is quite suitable and intuitive for the ``**kwargs`` typing use case as the keywords arguments are "unpacked" from the ``TypedDict``. Secondly, there would be no need to introduce any new special forms. Lastly, the use of ``Unpack`` for the purposes described in this PEP does not interfere with the use cases described in PEP 646.

Author: I don't think there is a need for that - in the case of `Unpack` the AST should be consistent with the runtime annotations. The argument for doing that would be to keep `Unpack[Movie]` and `**kwargs: **Movie` consistent, but then `Unpack` would probably have to call that as well when being used in different contexts - it feels like it might be worth it to keep it as so that `Unpack` had the flexibility for other use cases?

Alternatives
------------

> Instead of making the grammar change, ``Unpack`` could be the only way to annotate ``**kwargs`` of different types. However, introducing the double asterisk syntax has two advantages. Namely, it is more concise and more intuitive than using ``Unpack``.

Reviewer 2: The "more concise and more intuitive" argument is unlikely to be enough to justify a grammar change here. This is an advanced typing feature that will be used by very few Python programmers, so making it slightly more concise and intuitive is not a strong argument.

Reviewer 3: For reference, here is PEP 646's justification for its proposed grammar changes (PEP 646 was accepted by the Steering Council): https://peps.python.org/pep-0646/#alternatives-why-not-just-use-unpack

PEP: 692
Title: Using TypedDict for more precise \*\*kwargs typing
Author: Franek Magiera <framagie@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 29-May-2022
Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History: 29-May-2022

Abstract
========

Current specification enables for type hinting ``**kwargs`` as long as all of
the keyword arguments specified by them are of the same type. However, that
behaviour can be very limiting. Therefore, in this PEP we propose a new way to
enable more precise ``**kwargs`` typing. The new approach revolves around using
``TypedDict`` to type ``**kwargs`` that comprise keyword arguments of different
types.

> 

Reviewer 5: Might be worth highlighting near the beginning that:

* a Python grammar change is being proposed

Since that is useful context for a reader to determine whether they need to respond to changes in the PEP.

Reviewer 6: It would be nice if a note could be added that

> Usage of Unpack for *args and TypeVarTuple is proposed in PEP 589.

or an update note added to `PEP 589` to the effect of:

> **UPDATE:** Usage of Unpack also for **kwargs and TypedDict is proposed in PEP 692.

to link the two and provide greater traceability. It's a little unclear to me whether or not `Unpack` will work for all 4.

Author: `Unpack` isn't mentioned until the Backwards Compatibility section where it is linked to PEP 646. Added a note that the new use cases of `Unpack` should not interfere with the behaviour described in 646.

To support the aforementioned use case we propose to use the double asterisk
syntax inside of the type annotation. The required grammar change is discussed
in more detail in section `Grammar Changes`_. Continuing the previous example:

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...

would mean that the ``**kwargs`` comprise two keyword arguments specified by
``Movie`` (i.e. a ``name`` keyword of type ``str`` and a ``year`` keyword of
type ``int``). Then, inside the function itself, the type checkers should treat
the ``kwargs`` parameter as a ``TypedDict``:

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie) -> None:
        assert_type(kwargs, Movie)  # OK!

Using the new annotation will not have any runtime effect - it should only be
taken into account by the type checkers.

Function calls with standard dictionaries
-----------------------------------------

Calling a function that has ``**kwargs`` typed using the ``**kwargs: **Movie``
syntax with a standard dictionary must generate an error. For example:

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...

    movie: dict[str, object] = {"name": "Life of Brian", "year": 1979}
    foo(**movie)  # WRONG! Movie is of type dict[str, object]

>     typedMovie: Movie = {"name": "The Meaning of Life", "year": 1983}
>     foo(**typedMovie)  # OK!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    typed_movie: Movie = {"name": "The Meaning of Life", "year": 1983}
    foo(**typed_movie)  # OK!
```
Nit: [Camelcase is not for Python.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hgI0p1zf31k)

Keyword collisions
------------------

A ``TypedDict`` that is used to type ``**kwargs`` could potentially contain keys
that are already defined in the function's signature. If the duplicate name is a

> standard argument, an error should be reported. If the duplicate name is a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
standard argument, an error should be reported by type checkers. If the duplicate name is a
```

positional only argument, no errors should be generated. For example:

::

    def foo(name, **kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...     # WRONG! "name" will
                                                      # always bind to the first
                                                      # parameter.

    def foo(name, /, **kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...  # OK! "name" is a
                                                      # positional argument,
                                                      # so **kwargs can contain
                                                      # a "name" keyword.

Required and non-required keys
------------------------------

By default all keys in a ``TypedDict`` are required. This behaviour can be
overridden by setting the dictionary's ``total`` parameter as ``False``.

> Moreover, PEP 655 introduced new type qualifiers - ``typing.Required`` and

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Moreover, :pep:`655` introduced new type qualifiers - ``typing.Required`` and
```
Suggest making the PEP link explicit. (I can't remember if regular text in format "PEP ###" is auto-linked or not.)

``typing.NotRequired`` - that enable specyfing whether a particular key is
required or not:

::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        title: str
        year: NotRequired[int]

When using a ``TypedDict`` to type ``**kwargs`` all of the required and
non-required keys should correspond to required and non-required function
keyword parameters. Therefore, if a required key is not supported by the caller,

> then an error must be reported.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
then an error must be reported by type checkers.
```

the source function. Again, required and not required keys should be compatible
with the keyword arguments and the rest of the parameters should be compatible.
For example:

::

    class Example(TypedDict):
        animal: Dog
        string: str
        number: NotRequired[int]

    def src(animal: Animal, string: str, number: int = ...): ...
    def dest(**kwargs: **Example): ...

    dest = src  # OK!

4. The destination callable contains ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` and the source
callable contains untyped ``**kwargs``:

::

    def src(**kwargs): ...
    def dest(**kwargs: **Movie): ...

    dest = src  # OK!

5. The destination callable contains ``**kwargs: **TypedDict``, the source
callable contains traditionally typed ``**kwargs: T`` and each of the
destination function ``TypedDict``\'s fields is assignable to a variable of type
``T``.

On the other hand, if the destination callable contains either untyped or
traditionally typed ``**kwargs: T`` and the source callable is typed using
``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` then an error should be generated, because
traditionally typed ``**kwargs`` aren't checked for keyword names.

> To sum up points, functions' parameters should behave contravariantly. In
> addition, functions' return types should behave covariantly. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To summarize, function parameters should behave contravariantly and
function return types should behave covariantly. 
```
Nit: Wordsmithing

for ``**kwargs`` annotations. The proposed change is to extend the ``kwds`` rule
as follows:

Before:

::

    kwds: '**' param_no_default 

After:

::

    kwds:
        | '**' param_no_default_double_star_annotation
        | '**' param_no_default

    param_no_default_double_star_annotation:
        | param_double_star_annotation & ')'

    param_double_star_annotation: NAME double_star_annotation

    double_star_annotation: ':' double_star_expression

    double_star_expression: '**' expression

A new AST node needs to be created so that type checkers can differentiate the
semantics of the new syntax and take into account that the ``**kwargs`` should
be unpacked. The proposition is to add a new ``DoubleStarred`` AST node. Then,
an AST node for the function defined as:

::

    def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...

should look as below:

::

    FunctionDef(
      name='foo',
      args=arguments(
        posonlyargs=[],
        args=[],
        kwonlyargs=[],
        kw_defaults=[],
        kwarg=arg(
          arg='kwargs',
          annotation=DoubleStarred(
            value=Name(id='Movie', ctx=Load()),

>             ctx=Load())),

Reviewer 5: So a `DoubleStarred(...)` would appear here if you wrote `def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...`.

What would appear instead if you wrote `def foo(**kwargs: Unpack[Movie]): ...`? (This may be a useful example to distinguish how both forms would appear in the AST, if they were to appear differently.)

Author: Added the AST with Unpack in the Backwards Compatibility section.

        defaults=[]),
      body=[
        Expr(
          value=Constant(value=Ellipsis))],
      decorator_list=[])],
    type_ignores=[])

The runtime annotations should be consistent with the AST. Continuing the
previous example:

::

    >>> def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...
    ...
    >>> foo.__annotations__
    {'kwargs': **Movie}

The double asterisk operator should call the ``__unpack__`` special method on
the object it was used on. This means that ``def foo(**kwargs: **T): ...`` is

> equivalent to ``def foo(**kwargs: T.__unpack__()): ...``.

Reviewer 5: This appears to imply that an entirely new `**expr` operator (with related `__unpack__` dunder) is being introduced, that could potentially be used _anywhere_. I would advocate narrowing the scope of the PEP to only allow the new `**expr` syntax in the position of a kwarg annotation and not (yet) elsewhere else.

Reviewer 5: Based on reading other comments it sounds like there is _not_ an intent to introduce a new general operator. In that case I might suggest replacing the word "operator" here with some other word like "syntax":

```suggestion
The double asterisk syntax should call the ``__unpack__`` special method on
the object it was used on. This means that ``def foo(**kwargs: **T): ...`` is
equivalent to ``def foo(**kwargs: T.__unpack__()): ...``.
```

    {'kwargs': **Movie}

The double asterisk syntax should call the ``__unpack__`` special method on
the object it was used on. This means that ``def foo(**kwargs: **T): ...`` is
equivalent to ``def foo(**kwargs: T.__unpack__()): ...``. In addition,
``**Movie`` in the example above is the ``repr`` of the object that
``__unpack__()`` returns.

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------

Using the double asterisk syntax for annotating ``**kwargs`` would be available
only in new versions of Python. :pep:`646` dealt with the similar problem and
its authors introduced a new type operator ``Unpack``. For the purposes of this
PEP, the proposition is to reuse ``Unpack`` for more precise ``**kwargs``
typing. For example::

    def foo(**kwargs: Unpack[Movie]) -> None: ...

There are several reasons for reusing :pep:`646`'s ``Unpack``. Firstly, the
name is quite suitable and intuitive for the ``**kwargs`` typing use case as
the keywords arguments are "unpacked" from the ``TypedDict``. Secondly, there
would be no need to introduce any new special forms. Lastly, the use of
``Unpack`` for the purposes described in this PEP does not interfere with the
use cases described in :pep:`646`.

> It is worth pointing out that the AST generated for ``Unpack`` would differ

Reviewer: This seems unnecessary since this AST is standard for all Python 3 versions (Unpack isn't syntactically special) and we're not changing anything to it. I'd remove this paragraph.

Author: Right, makes sense, removed.

Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History: 29-May-2022

Abstract
========

Currently ``**kwargs`` can be type hinted as long as all of the keyword
arguments specified by them are of the same type. However, that behaviour can
be very limiting. Therefore, in this PEP we propose a new way to enable more
precise ``**kwargs`` typing. The new approach revolves around using
``TypedDict`` to type ``**kwargs`` that comprise keyword arguments of different
types. It also involves introducing a grammar change and a new dunder
``__unpack__``\.

Motivation
==========

Currently annotating ``**kwargs`` with a type ``T`` means that the ``kwargs``
type is in fact ``dict[str, T]``. For example:

::

    def foo(**kwargs: str) -> None: ...

means that all keyword arguments in ``foo`` are strings (i.e., ``kwargs`` is
of type ``dict[str, str]``). This behaviour limits the ability to type
annotate ``**kwargs`` only to the cases where all of them are of the same type.
However, it is often the case that keyword arguments conveyed by ``**kwargs``
have different types that are dependent on the keyword's name. In those cases
type annotating ``**kwargs`` is not possible. This is especially a problem for

> already existing codebases where the need of refactoring the code in order to

Reviewer 6: Based on the conversation from “ Support for default types in TypedDict #1165”, I’m disinclined to believe the additional type hinting provided would be of benefit. The kwargs are hidden (abstracted) within a TypedDict, so the type hinting provided (esp. by certain language servers) doesn't provide useful information to the caller on what arguments to pass.

I recommend a note be added that this PEP is born out of convenience, not necessity, and that it be strongly encouraged wherever possible that the full argument list be type hinted.

Author: Thanks for bringing that up!

>I’m disinclined to believe the additional type hinting provided would be of benefit.

In my opinion the proposal could bring benefits, although I agree in some cases (new codebases where the keyword arguments are known from the start/typing via stubs) using "explicit" signatures is a better tool for the job.

>The kwargs are hidden (abstracted) within a TypedDict, so the type hinting provided (esp. by certain language servers) doesn't provide useful information to the caller on what arguments to pass.

Proposed type hinting would show the caller exactly what kind of keyword arguments the function expects. It is just the case of looking up how the TypedDict is defined (not an expert on language servers but seems like those could deal with "unpacking" the kwargs typed this way and provide a more user friendly hint). As I've mentioned in the response to the thread you linked, realistically not everyone will want to refactor and in that case I'd much rather see `**kwargs: **SomeTypedDictIHaveToLookUp` than `**kwargs: Any`. Also then, `**kwargs` could be treated as a `TypedDict` and type checked inside the function itself without the need of refactoring.

I think the discussion uncovered some valuable points that are worth adding to the draft (when it is better to use something else than what is being proposed). Let me try to include that.

Keyword collisions
------------------

A ``TypedDict`` that is used to type ``**kwargs`` could potentially contain
keys that are already defined in the function's signature. If the duplicate
name is a standard argument, an error should be reported by type checkers.
If the duplicate name is a positional only argument, no errors should be
generated. For example:

::

    def foo(name, **kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...     # WRONG! "name" will
                                                      # always bind to the
                                                      # first parameter.

    def foo(name, /, **kwargs: **Movie) -> None: ...  # OK! "name" is a
                                                      # positional argument,
                                                      # so **kwargs can contain
                                                      # a "name" keyword.

Required and non-required keys
------------------------------

By default all keys in a ``TypedDict`` are required. This behaviour can be
overridden by setting the dictionary's ``total`` parameter as ``False``.
Moreover, :pep:`655` introduced new type qualifiers - ``typing.Required`` and

> ``typing.NotRequired`` - that enable specyfing whether a particular key is

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
``typing.NotRequired`` - that enable specifing whether a particular key is
```

Nit: Spelling

it needs completely ignoring any additional values.

The calls to ``bar`` and ``spam`` will fail because an unexpected keyword
argument will be passed to the ``takes_name`` function.

Therefore, ``kwargs`` hinted with an unpacked ``TypedDict`` can only be passed
to another function if the function to which unpacked kwargs are being passed
to has ``**kwargs`` in its signature as well, because then additional keywords
would not cause errors at runtime during function invocation. Otherwise, the
type checker should generate an error.

In cases similar to the ``bar`` function above the problem could be worked
around by explicitly dereferencing desired fields and using them as parameters
to perform the function call:

::

    def bar(**kwargs: **Animal):
        name = kwargs["name"]
        takes_name(name)

Intended Usage
--------------

This proposal will bring a large benefit to the codebases that already use
``**kwargs`` because of the flexibility that they provided in the initial
phases of the development, but now are mature enough to use a stricter
contract via type hints. 

Adding type hints directly in the source code as opposed to the ``*.pyi``

> stubs benefits to anyone who reads the code as it is easier to understand.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
stubs benefits anyone who reads the code as it is easier to understand.
```
Nit: Wordsmith

    foo("Life of Brian", 1979)            # This would be now failing type
                                          # checking but is fine.

    foo(name="Life of Brian", year=1979)  # This would be the only way to call
                                          # the function now that passes type
                                          # checking.

Therefore, in this case it is again preferred to type hint such function
explicitly as:

::

    def foo(name: str, year: int): ...

Grammar Changes
===============

This PEP requires a grammar change so that the double asterisk syntax is
allowed for ``**kwargs`` annotations. The proposed change is to extend the
``kwds`` rule as follows:

Before:

::

    kwds: '**' param_no_default 

After:

::

    kwds:
        | '**' param_no_default_double_star_annotation
        | '**' param_no_default

    param_no_default_double_star_annotation:
        | param_double_star_annotation & ')'

    param_double_star_annotation: NAME double_star_annotation

    double_star_annotation: ':' double_star_expression

    double_star_expression: '**' expression

A new AST node needs to be created so that type checkers can differentiate the

> semantics of the new syntax and take into account that the ``**kwargs`` should

Reviewer 5: > differentiate the semantics of the new syntax

I didn't understand what this fragment was trying to say. Differentiate what from what else?

                                                      # so **kwargs can contain
                                                      # a "name" keyword.

Required and non-required keys
------------------------------

By default all keys in a ``TypedDict`` are required. This behaviour can be
overridden by setting the dictionary's ``total`` parameter as ``False``.
Moreover, :pep:`655` introduced new type qualifiers - ``typing.Required`` and
``typing.NotRequired`` - that enable specifying whether a particular key is
required or not:

::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        title: str
        year: NotRequired[int]

When using a ``TypedDict`` to type ``**kwargs`` all of the required and
non-required keys should correspond to required and non-required function
keyword parameters. Therefore, if a required key is not supported by the
caller, then an error must be reported by type checkers.

Assignment
----------

Assignments of a function typed with the ``**kwargs: **Movie`` construct and
another callable type should pass type checking only if they are compatible.
This can happen in the following cases:

1. Both destination and source functions have a ``**kwargs: **TypedDict``

> parameter and the destination function's ``TypedDict`` is assignable to the

Author: Makes sense, will try to pick that up tomorrow (I'm on the road again with limited access to Internet and my computer).

> parameter and the destination function's ``TypedDict`` is assignable to the

Author: In the end used subsections for that.

::

    FunctionDef(
      name='foo',
      args=arguments(
        posonlyargs=[],
        args=[],
        kwonlyargs=[],
        kw_defaults=[],
        kwarg=arg(
          arg='kwargs',
          annotation=Subscript(
            value=Name(id='Unpack', ctx=Load()),
            slice=Name(id='Movie', ctx=Load()),
            ctx=Load())),
        defaults=[]),
      body=[
        Expr(
          value=Constant(value=Ellipsis))],
      decorator_list=[]),

Alternatives
------------

Instead of making the grammar change, ``Unpack`` could be the only way to
annotate ``**kwargs`` of different types. However, introducing the double
asterisk syntax has two advantages. Namely, it is more concise and more
intuitive than using ``Unpack``.

How to Teach This
=================

This PEP could be linked in the ``typing`` module's documentation. Moreover, a
new section on using ``Unpack`` as well as the new double asterisk syntax could
be added to the aforementioned docs. Similar sections could be also added to
the mypy's documentation and typing documentation at
https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.

Reference Implementation
========================

> There is a proof-of-concept implementation of typing ``**kwargs`` using
> ``TypedDict`` on GitHub [#mypyPull10576]_, [#mypyExtensionsPull22]_ based on
> mypy. The implementation uses ``Expand`` instead of ``Unpack``.

Reviewer 7: Seems like this one might have gotten lost:

```suggestion
``TypedDict`` as a `pull request to mypy <mypyPull10576_>`__
and `to mypy_extensions <mypyExtensionsPull22_>`__.
The implementation uses ``Expand`` instead of ``Unpack``.
```

Make these links, well, links, instead of footnotes.

be compatible with the keys and values from the ``TypedDict`` must be keyword
only arguments:

::

    def dest(animal: Dog, string: str, number: int = ...): ...
    dest(animal_instance, "some string")  # OK!
    dest = src
    dest(animal_instance, "some string")  # WRONG! The same call fails at
                                          # runtime now because 'src' expects
                                          # keyword arguments.

3. The reverse situation where the destination callable
contains ``**kwargs: **TypedDict`` and the source callable doesn't contain
``**kwargs`` should be only allowed if the ``TypedDict`` in the destination
function signature is final. This is because, we cannot be sure that additional
keyword arguments are not being passed in when an instance of a subclass had
been assigned to a variable with a base class type and then unpacked in the
destination callable invocation:

::

    def dest(**Animal): ...
    def src(name: str): ...

    dog: Dog = {"name": "Daisy", "breed": "Labrador"}
    animal: Animal = dog

    dest = src      # WRONG!
    dest(**animal)  # Fails at runtime.

> However, when the ``TypedDict`` in the function signature is final, we are

Reviewer 8: Question: The idea that decorating a TD class with @final ensures its values will not have additional keys doesn’t make sense to me. PEP 589 says that TD compatibility is based on structural, not nominal, subtyping. So whether another TD *subclasses* the intended one (as prevented by final) is irrelevant. 

Here’s an [example](https://mypy-play.net/?mypy=latest&python=3.10&gist=084cc24abbae44aa982bd2255cb325d5).

Author: Right, I was thinking about that, thanks for mentioning that. At the time it seemed like a good idea because I thought that as a user you would have to "hack around" to break that intentionally, but probably that's not a good premise to base the specification on. On second thought it seems like it would make more sense to disallow that. Let me make the changes.
